doc-2857: namespace page (#10954)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/vm-management/launchpad-for-vms/infrastructure/namespaces.md

| `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager`    | Applied to all labels managed by VMO, including those created in the UI                                                                            |
| `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin=created` | Distinguishes namespaces created by a user in VMO (deletable from the UI) from namespaces created automatically by the Launchpad for VMs appliance |

Managed namespaces:

- Are listed in relevant drop-downs and filters.
- Can be edited from a single modal.
- Can be created on-the-fly from various pages (for example, **Workloads** > **Virtual Machines** > **Create VM**)

Resource lists default to **All Namespaces**, showing resources across all namespaces you can access. For OIDC users
with namespace scoped RoleBindings (granted through **Settings** > **Access Management**), only their permitted
namespaces appear in drop-downs and filters. Users with cluster-wide access can view all managed namespaces. You can
filter by a specific namespace using the namespace drop-down. namespaces appear in drop-downs and filters. Users with
cluster-wide access can view all managed namespaces. You can filter by a specific namespace using the namespace

> drop-down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filter by a specific namespace using the namespace drop-down. 
```

Dupe

namespace is immediately managed. -->

1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.

2. Select **Create Namespace**. The **Create Namespace** modal window contains the following tabs.

   | Tab             | Description                                               |
   | --------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
   | **General**     | The namespace name, plus optional labels and annotations. |
   | **Quotas**      | Optional namespace-wide Resource Quota caps.              |
   | **Limit Range** | Optional per-container default requests and limits.       |

3. On the **General** tab, enter a
   [DNS-1123 compliant](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/names/#dns-label-names)
   **Namespace name** (lowercase letters, digits, and hyphens; up to 63 characters; must start and end with an
   alphanumeric character). Validation runs as you type.
   [DNS-1123 compliant](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/names/#dns-label-names)
   **Namespace name** (lowercase letters, digits, and hyphens; up to 63 characters; must start and end with an

>    alphanumeric character). Validation runs as you type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Dupe

4. _(Optional)_ Enter key-value pairs for **Labels** and **Annotations** as necessary.

   ### Reserved Key-Values

   Certain keys and values are reserved for VMO and Kubernetes operations. The modal window hides these keys to prevent
   accidental edits. If you need to set a `kubernetes.io/` key, use `kubectl edit namespace` directly. Certain keys and
   values are reserved for VMO and Kubernetes operations. The modal window hides these keys to prevent accidental edits.

>    If you need to set a `kubernetes.io/` key, use `kubectl edit namespace` directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   accidental edits. If you need to set a `kubernetes.io/` key, use `kubectl edit namespace` directly.
```
Dupe

   | Default CPU Limit per container      | `limits.cpu` for containers that do not specify their own.      |
   | Default Memory Request per container | `requests.memory` for containers that do not specify their own. |
   | Default Memory Limit per container   | `limits.memory` for containers that do not specify their own.   |

   If a workload already declares its own `resources.requests` or `resources.limits`, the Limit Range does not override
   it; it only fills in defaults.

6. **Create** the namespace.

   The namespace is created with the appropriate labels set. Any provided **Quotas** and **Limit Range** values are
   applied as a follow-up step. If those follow-up calls fail, the namespace is still created, and you can edit the
   namespace to adjust values as needed

## Adopt Existing Namespaces

You can adopt a namespace that already exists in the cluster so that it can be managed by VMO.

1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
2. Select **Add Existing**.
3. Select one or more unmanaged namespaces from the list and click **Adopt Namespace**.

> Adopted namespaces are labeled `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager` but **not** marked with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adopted namespaces are labeled `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager` but are _not_ labeled
```

`vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin=created`.

## Edit Namespaces

Editing an existing namespace uses a similar process as [creating a namespace](#create-namespaces).

From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**, and select the **Edit** icon beside the

> namespace. Add, remove, and edit fields as necessary, selecting **Save changes** when finished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
2. Select the **Edit** icon beside the namespace. 
3. Add, remove, and edit fields as necessary.
4. Select **Save changes** when finished.
```

It ended up looking weird that this was the only one not using a list. My bad.

:::info

Namespace names are immutable. Kubernetes does not allow renaming a namespace, so the name field is shown but disabled

> in edit mode. To use a different name, create a new namespace, move resources over, and delete the old namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in edit mode. To use a different name, create a new namespace, move resources to the new namespace, and delete the old namespace.
```

:::

## Delete Namespaces

Take the following steps to delete a namespace created using the VMO UI.

1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
2. Right-click the namespace you want to delete and select **Delete Namespace**. This can only be done for namespaces
   with a **VMO Status** of **Created**. Alternatively, use the **Delete** icon.
3. Enter the namespace you are deleting, and select **Delete**.

### Unadopt Namespaces

You can remove the ability to provision VMO-related resources in non-VMO managed namespaces by "unadopting" a namespace,
but you cannot delete the namespace itself from the VMO UI. Unadopting a namespace does not remove any resources within
the namespace.

> To delete the underlying namespace, use `kubectl` or similar tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the namespace. To delete the underlying namespace, use `kubectl` or similar tool.
```

---
sidebar_label: "Namespaces"
title: "Namespaces"
description:
  "Create, adopt, and edit managed namespaces, and apply resource quotas and limit ranges on the Launchpad for VMs
  appliance."
icon: " "
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 10
tags: ["vmo", "vm launchpad appliance", "infrastructure", "namespaces"]
---

> <!-- vale off -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Launchpad for VMs appliance UI allows you to create, manage, and edit Kubernetes namespaces. You can also apply Resource

> Quotas and Limit Ranges to those namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Virtual Machine Orchestrator (VMO) allows you to create, manage, and edit Kubernetes namespaces. You can also apply [Resource
Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) and [Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) to those namespaces.
```

## Managed Namespaces

A namespace is managed when it has the label `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager`. For managed namespaces,
Launchpad for VMs:

- Lists them in dropdowns and filters.
- Lets you edit labels, annotations, Resource Quotas, and Limit Ranges from a single modal.

> - Allows quick-create from various pages, such as VM creation and networking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Namespaces managed by VMO are denoted with the following labels:

 | Label | Description |
 | --- | --- |
 | `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager` | Applied to all labels managed by VMO, including those created in the UI | 
 | `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin=created` | Distinguishes namespaces created by a user in VMO (deletable
from the UI) from namespaces created automatically by the Launchpad for VMs appliance |

Managed namespaces: 

- Are listed in relevant drop-downs and filters.
- Can be edited from a single modal.
- Can be created on-the-fly from various pages (for example, **Workloads** > **Virtual Machines** > **Create VM**)
```

Double check me on the second label: this was the original, but it's what I THINK it meant

> A second label, `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin=created`, distinguishes namespaces created by a user (deletable
from the UI) from namespaces that were adopted (only removable from appliance management; the underlying namespace
remains in the cluster)

Reviewer: Remove this line if you confirm it can't be added from as many pages as previously

> - Can be created on-the-fly from various pages (for example, **Workloads** > **Virtual Machines** > **Create VM**)

Resource lists default to **All Namespaces**, showing resources across all namespaces you can access. For OIDC users
with namespace scoped RoleBindings (granted through **Settings** > **Access Management**), only their permitted

> namespaces appear in dropdowns and filters. Users with cluster-wide access view all managed namespaces. You can filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
namespaces appear in drop-downs and filters. Users with cluster-wide access can view all managed namespaces. You can filter
```

> by a specific namespace using the namespace dropdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by a specific namespace using the namespace drop-down.
```

:::info

When creating VMs or other resources, choose a managed namespace. Namespaces without the `vmo-manager` label may not
appear in dropdowns.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Not sure if this is needed? If we tell them to choose a managed namespace, but non-managed namespaces aren't populated in the list, then... What's the point of this admonition?

A second label, `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin=created`, distinguishes namespaces created by a user (deletable
from the UI) from namespaces that were **adopted** (only removable from appliance management; the underlying namespace

> remains in the cluster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Moved this to https://github.com/spectrocloud/librarium/pull/10954/changes#r3507789691

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

VMO manages the following namespaces by default.

| Namespace           | Purpose                                                 |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| `default`           | Default Kubernetes namespace.                           |
| `vm-dashboard`      | The appliance's own namespace, or the configured value. |
| `vmo-golden-images` | Dedicated namespace for golden image DataVolumes.       |
```

I think bringing this up to the managed namespaces section makes more sense

## Create Namespaces

> ### Quick-Create Links

Reviewer: Is this still accurate? For example, the quick link in the current env (create VMs step) opens a new browser tab and takes me to the main create namespace page.

In the networking section, there is only a drop-down--no create option

The Access Management was the only one I could. If this is the only exception, I would remove this section as a whole and just point them to this page for more information on that procedural page

Author: Networking section definitely doesn't have it. I think they changed the VM one to launch Infrastructure > Namespaces as a quasi "quick link" while Access Management (this should be **Users**). I want to leave this in for now as I suspect we'll see it being added elsewhere in the future.

You can quick-create namespaces from several pages without leaving the page:

- **VM creation**: the Namespace dropdown offers **Create namespace** when the desired namespace does not exist.
- **Networking**: when creating a NAD, you can create the target namespace first.
- **Access policies**: when scoping access to a namespace, you can create it inline.

Namespaces created through quick-create modal applies the `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager` label so the
namespace is immediately managed.

### Create from the Namespaces Page

> 1. Navigate to **Infrastructure > Namespaces**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
```

> 2. Click **Create Namespace**. A modal opens with three tabs described in the table below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select **Create Namespace**. The **Create Namespace** modal window contains the following tabs.
```

   | Tab             | Description                                               |
   | --------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
   | **General**     | The namespace name, plus optional labels and annotations. |
   | **Quotas**      | Optional namespace-wide Resource Quota caps.              |
   | **Limit Range** | Optional per-container default requests and limits.       |

3. On the **General** tab, enter a

>    [DNS-1123 compliant name](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/names/#dns-label-names)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   [DNS-1123 compliant](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/names/#dns-label-names) **Namespace name**
```

   (lowercase letters, digits, and hyphens; up to 63 characters; must start and end with an alphanumeric character).
   Validation runs as you type.

> 4. (Optional) Enter in values for **Labels** and **Annotations**. Each is a key/value pair, and you can add multiple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. _(Optional)_ Enter key-value pairs for **Labels** and **Annotations** as necessary. 

### Reserved Key-Values

Certain keys and values are reserved for VMO and Kubernetes operations. The modal window hides these keys to prevent accidental edits. If you need to set a `kubernetes.io/` key, use `kubectl edit namespace` directly.

| Label | Annotation | Key | Value | 
| --- | --- |
| :white_check_mark: | :x: | `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by` |  `vmo-manager` | 
| :white_check_mark: | :x: | `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin` | `created` | 
| :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | `kubernetes.io/...` and `*.kubernetes.io/...` | - | 
| :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | `k8s.io/...` and `*.k8s.io/...` | - | 
| :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | `pod-security.kubernetes.io/...` | - | 

```

>    Refer to [Reserved Keys](#reserved-keys) for keys Launchpad for VMs controls automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Moved this section here ^ so the user sees the options as they're going through the process.

5. (Optional) Enter in values for **Quotas** and **Limit Range**. Refer to
   [Resource Quotas vs Limit Range](#resource-quotas-vs-limit-range). Empty fields are skipped, and the namespace is

>    created without that constraint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. _(Optional)_ Enter **Quotas** and **Limit Range** values as necessary. 

- Use [Resource
Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) to set resource constraints on all pods in the namespace, keeping resource-hungry namespaces from starving other workloads on the cluster.
- Use [Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) to automatically set resource constraints for each container within the namespace that does not specify requests or limits for CPU or memory.

### Quota Fields

On the **Quotas** tab, all fields are optional.

| Field                 | What it caps                                                |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| Total CPU Requests    | Sum of `requests.cpu` across all pods in the namespace.     |
| Total CPU Limits      | Sum of `limits.cpu` across all pods.                        |
| Total Memory Requests | Sum of `requests.memory`.                                   |
| Total Memory Limits   | Sum of `limits.memory`.                                     |
| Total Storage         | Sum of `requests.storage` across all Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) in the namespace. |
| Max Pods              | Maximum number of pods in the namespace.                    |

CPU values use Kubernetes CPU units (`1`, `500m`, `1.5`). Memory and storage use binary suffixes (`128Mi`, `4Gi`).

### Limit Range Fields

On the **Limit Range** tab, all fields are optional.

| Field                                | What it sets                                                     |
| ------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Default CPU Request per container    | `requests.cpu` for containers that do not specify their own.    |
| Default CPU Limit per container      | `limits.cpu` for containers that do not specify their own.      |
| Default Memory Request per container | `requests.memory` for containers that do not specify their own. |
| Default Memory Limit per container   | `limits.memory` for containers that do not specify their own.   |

If a workload already declares its own `resources.requests` or `resources.limits`, the Limit Range does not override it;
it only fills in defaults.
```

> 6. Click **Create**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Create** the namespace.
```

The namespace is created with the appliance labels set, and then any provided **Quotas** and **Limit Range** are applied
as a follow-up step. If those follow-up calls fail, the namespace is still created, and you can retry from **Edit

> Namespace**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The namespace is created with the appropriate labels set. Any provided **Quotas** and **Limit Range** values are applied
as a follow-up step. If those follow-up calls fail, the namespace is still created, and you can edit the namespace to adjust values as needed.
```

### Adopt Existing Namespaces

> You can adopt a namespace that already exists in the cluster so that it falls under appliance management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can adopt a namespace that already exists in the cluster so that it can be managed by VMO.
```

1. Go to **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
2. Click **Add Existing**.

> 3. Select one or more unmanaged namespaces from the list and click **Adopt Namespace**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
2. Select **Add Existing**.
3. Select one or more unmanaged namespaces from the list and click **Adopt Namespace**.
```

Adopted namespaces are labeled `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager` but **not** marked with

> `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin=created`. You can remove them from appliance management (unadopt), but you cannot

Reviewer: To unadopt them, do you need to just removed the `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager` label?

Author: <img width="511" height="440" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2b5afdbc-62f6-4e54-81b0-cfe1516e53c0" />

Nope. Just right click, select `Remove from VMO` and then type the namespace name in. You get the attached screenshot.

| ------------------- | ----------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Labels**          | General     | Appliance-reserved and Kubernetes system keys are filtered out automatically. Refer to [Reserved Keys](#reserved-keys). |
| **Annotations**     | General     | Kubernetes system annotations are filtered out automatically.                                                           |
| **Resource Quotas** | Quotas      | Clear a field to remove that cap.                                                                                       |
| **Limit Range**     | Limit Range | Clear a field to remove that default.                                                                                   |

:::warning

Namespace names are immutable. Kubernetes does not allow renaming a namespace, so the name field is shown but disabled
in edit mode. To use a different name, create a new namespace, move resources over, and delete the old one.

:::

Editing only writes labels and annotations you can control. Reserved keys, such as the appliance management labels and

> Kubernetes-owned keys like `kubernetes.io/metadata.name`, are preserved server-side regardless of what is sent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Editing an existing namespace uses a similar process as [creating a namespace](#create-namespaces). From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**, and select the **Edit** icon beside the namespace. Add, remove, and edit fields as necessary, selecting **Save changes** when finished. 

:::info

Namespace names are immutable. Kubernetes does not allow renaming a namespace, so the name field is shown but disabled
in edit mode. To use a different name, create a new namespace, move resources over, and delete the old namespace.

:::
```

Reviewer: Let's just point them back to the create guide and not rehash anything.

> ## Actions Column and Context Menu

Reviewer: I would reframe this as `Delete Namespaces`. While they need to "unadopt" namespaces, they will probably try to delete them from the UI first, only to realize they can't, so this is a good place to surface that info as well.

The actions column on the Namespaces table is icon-only and matches the VM list pattern.

> | Icon       | Action                                   | When shown                                                                                              |

Reviewer: The table is overkill imo 💀 I really hope they know what an edit and trash icon do.

| Total Storage         | Sum of `requests.storage` across all PVCs in the namespace. |
| Max Pods              | Maximum number of pods in the namespace.                    |

CPU values use Kubernetes CPU units (`1`, `500m`, `1.5`). Memory and storage use binary suffixes (`128Mi`, `4Gi`).

### Limit Range Fields

On the **Limit Range** tab, all fields are optional.

| Field                                | What it sets                                                     |
| ------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Default CPU Request per container    | `requests.cpu` for containers that did not specify their own.    |
| Default CPU Limit per container      | `limits.cpu` for containers that did not specify their own.      |
| Default Memory Request per container | `requests.memory` for containers that did not specify their own. |
| Default Memory Limit per container   | `limits.memory` for containers that did not specify their own.   |

If a workload already declares its own `resources.requests` or `resources.limits`, the Limit Range does not override it;

> it only fills in defaults.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Moved to https://github.com/spectrocloud/librarium/pull/10954/changes#r3508096333 so the user sees the fields as they are going through the process

## Reserved Keys

A small set of label and annotation keys is owned by either Launchpad for VMs or Kubernetes itself. These are
server-controlled: the appliance silently strips them from any client-supplied input and preserves the canonical values.

**Appliance-controlled labels** (always present on managed namespaces, never user-editable):

- `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by`: always set to `vmo-manager`.
- `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin`: `created` for namespaces the appliance created; absent for adopted namespaces.

**Kubernetes-controlled keys** (any key matching these patterns, in either labels or annotations):

- `kubernetes.io/...` and `*.kubernetes.io/...`
- `k8s.io/...` and `*.k8s.io/...`
- `pod-security.kubernetes.io/...` (pod security admission labels)

> The Edit modal hides these keys. If you need to set a `kubernetes.io/` key, use `kubectl edit namespace` directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Moved to https://github.com/spectrocloud/librarium/pull/10954/changes#r3508033687, where the user would encounter these fields

## Default Namespaces

On bootstrap, Launchpad for VMs automatically labels the following namespaces as managed.

| Namespace           | Purpose                                                 |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| `default`           | Default Kubernetes namespace.                           |
| `vm-dashboard`      | The appliance's own namespace, or the configured value. |
| `vmo-golden-images` | Dedicated namespace for golden image DataVolumes.       |

These namespaces are labeled if they exist. If they do not exist, the bootstrap process may create them, or they are

> created by the Helm chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Moved to https://github.com/spectrocloud/librarium/pull/10954/changes#r3507887558

:::info

The exact namespace names depend on Helm values (`VMO_NAMESPACE`, `VMO_GOLDEN_IMAGES_NAMESPACE`). Refer to the platform
configuration for your deployment.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Is this needed? Are they able to edit the Helm chart values?

---
sidebar_label: "Namespaces"
title: "Namespaces"
description:
  "Create, adopt, and edit managed namespaces, and apply resource quotas and limit ranges on the Launchpad for VMs
  appliance."
icon: " "
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 10
tags: ["vmo", "vm launchpad appliance", "infrastructure", "namespaces"]
---

Virtual Machine Orchestrator (VMO) allows you to create, manage, and edit Kubernetes namespaces. You can also apply
[Resource Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) and
[Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) to those namespaces. Virtual Machine
Orchestrator (VMO) allows you to create, manage, and edit Kubernetes namespaces. You can also apply
[Resource Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) and

> [Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) to those namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) to those namespaces.
```

Repeated content

## Managed Namespaces

A namespace is managed when it has the label `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager`. For managed namespaces,
Launchpad for VMs:

- Lists them in dropdowns and filters.
- Lets you edit labels, annotations, Resource Quotas, and Limit Ranges from a single modal. Namespaces managed by VMO
  are denoted with the following labels:

> - Lets you edit labels, annotations, Resource Quotas, and Limit Ranges from a single modal. Namespaces managed by VMO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Namespaces managed by VMO
```

I think this was leftover content

  are denoted with the following labels:

| Label                                         | Description                                                                                                                                        |
| --------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager`    | Applied to all labels managed by VMO, including those created in the UI                                                                            |

> | `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin=created` | Distinguishes namespaces created by a user in VMO (deletable from the UI) from namespaces created automatically by the Launchpad for VMs appliance |

Reviewer: Can you make sure this is correct?

> from namespaces created automatically by the Launchpad for VMs appliance 

That was my interpretation of it during my initial edits, but I'm wondering if it's _any_ namespace in the cluster?

Author: `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin=created` only appears on namespaces created by user (so custom namespaces, if you will). Adopted namespaces do not have this (I added all of them and did a search -- didn't show up for any of them).

> Managed namespaces: Managed namespaces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managed namespaces:
```

filter by a specific namespace using the namespace drop-down. namespaces appear in drop-downs and filters. Users with
cluster-wide access can view all managed namespaces. You can filter by a specific namespace using the namespace
drop-down.

VMO manages the following namespaces by default.

| Namespace           | Purpose                                                 |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| `default`           | Default Kubernetes namespace.                           |
| `vm-dashboard`      | The appliance's own namespace, or the configured value. |
| `vmo-golden-images` | Dedicated namespace for golden image DataVolumes.       |

## Create Namespaces

### Quick-Create Links

You can quick-create namespaces from several pages without leaving the page:

- **VM creation**: the Namespace dropdown offers **Create namespace** when the desired namespace does not exist.
- **Access Management** > **Users**: when scoping access to a namespace, you can create it inline.

Namespaces created through quick-create modal applies the `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager` label so the

> namespace is immediately managed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- ### Quick-Create Links

You can quick-create namespaces from several pages without leaving the page:

- **VM creation**: the Namespace dropdown offers **Create namespace** when the desired namespace does not exist.
- **Access Management** > **Users**: when scoping access to a namespace, you can create it inline.

Namespaces created through quick-create modal applies the `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager` label so the
namespace is immediately managed. -->
```

If you want to leave it in for future expansion, I would add notes here (to remind you of the current situation) and comment it out like so ^ But I would not leave it is right now since this is not accurate.

   | Tab             | Description                                               |
   | --------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
   | **General**     | The namespace name, plus optional labels and annotations. |
   | **Quotas**      | Optional namespace-wide Resource Quota caps.              |
   | **Limit Range** | Optional per-container default requests and limits.       |

3. On the **General** tab, enter a
   [DNS-1123 compliant](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/names/#dns-label-names)
   **Namespace name** (lowercase letters, digits, and hyphens; up to 63 characters; must start and end with an
   alphanumeric character). Validation runs as you type.
   [DNS-1123 compliant](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/names/#dns-label-names)
   **Namespace name** (lowercase letters, digits, and hyphens; up to 63 characters; must start and end with an
   alphanumeric character). Validation runs as you type.

4. _(Optional)_ Enter key-value pairs for **Labels** and **Annotations** as necessary.

> 5. _(Optional)_ Enter key-value pairs for **Labels** and **Annotations** as necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Dupe

### Reserved Key-Values

Certain keys and values are reserved for VMO and Kubernetes operations. The modal window hides these keys to prevent
accidental edits. If you need to set a `kubernetes.io/` key, use `kubectl edit namespace` directly. Certain keys and
values are reserved for VMO and Kubernetes operations. The modal window hides these keys to prevent accidental edits. If
you need to set a `kubernetes.io/` key, use `kubectl edit namespace` directly.

| Label              | Annotation         | Key                                           | Value         |
| ------------------ | ------------------ | --------------------------------------------- | ------------- |
| :white_check_mark: | :x:                | `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by`                | `vmo-manager` |
| :white_check_mark: | :x:                | `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin`         | `created`     |
| :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | `kubernetes.io/...` and `*.kubernetes.io/...` | -             |
| :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | `k8s.io/...` and `*.k8s.io/...`               | -             |

> | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | `pod-security.kubernetes.io/...`              | -             |

Reviewer: This section needs to be indented so it is nested beneath step 4

| Label              | Annotation         | Key                                           | Value         |
| ------------------ | ------------------ | --------------------------------------------- | ------------- |
| :white_check_mark: | :x:                | `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by`                | `vmo-manager` |
| :white_check_mark: | :x:                | `vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin`         | `created`     |
| :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | `kubernetes.io/...` and `*.kubernetes.io/...` | -             |
| :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | `k8s.io/...` and `*.k8s.io/...`               | -             |

> | :white_check_mark: | :white_check_mark: | `pod-security.kubernetes.io/...`              | -             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Dupe

5. _(Optional)_ Enter **Quotas** and **Limit Range** values as necessary.

> 6. _(Optional)_ Enter **Quotas** and **Limit Range** values as necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Dupe

- Use [Resource Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) to set resource constraints on all
  pods in the namespace, keeping resource-hungry namespaces from starving other workloads on the cluster.
- Use [Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) to automatically set resource constraints
  for each container within the namespace that does not specify requests or limits for CPU or memory.
- Use [Resource Quotas](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/resource-quotas/) to set resource constraints on all
  pods in the namespace, keeping resource-hungry namespaces from starving other workloads on the cluster.
- Use [Limit Ranges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/limit-range/) to automatically set resource constraints

>   for each container within the namespace that does not specify requests or limits for CPU or memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Dupe (I think GitHub suggestions had a bad day lol)

> ### Quota Fields

Reviewer: The Quota fields and Limit Range fields also need to be indented so they live under the appropriate step

| --------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Total CPU Requests    | Sum of `requests.cpu` across all pods in the namespace.                                |
| Total CPU Limits      | Sum of `limits.cpu` across all pods.                                                   |
| Total Memory Requests | Sum of `requests.memory`.                                                              |
| Total Memory Limits   | Sum of `limits.memory`.                                                                |
| Field                 | What it caps                                                                           |
| --------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Total CPU Requests    | Sum of `requests.cpu` across all pods in the namespace.                                |
| Total CPU Limits      | Sum of `limits.cpu` across all pods.                                                   |
| Total Memory Requests | Sum of `requests.memory`.                                                              |

> | Total Memory Limits   | Sum of `limits.memory`.                                                                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Dupe

| Total Storage         | Sum of `requests.storage` across all Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) in the namespace. |
| Max Pods              | Maximum number of pods in the namespace.                                               |

> | Max Pods              | Maximum number of pods in the namespace.                                               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Dupe

CPU values use Kubernetes CPU units (`1`, `500m`, `1.5`). Memory and storage use binary suffixes (`128Mi`, `4Gi`).

### Limit Range Fields

On the **Limit Range** tab, all fields are optional.

| Field                                | What it sets                                                    |

> | ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------- |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Dupe

| ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Default CPU Request per container    | `requests.cpu` for containers that do not specify their own.    |
| Default CPU Limit per container      | `limits.cpu` for containers that do not specify their own.      |
| Default Memory Request per container | `requests.memory` for containers that do not specify their own. |
| Default Memory Limit per container   | `limits.memory` for containers that do not specify their own.   |

If a workload already declares its own `resources.requests` or `resources.limits`, the Limit Range does not override it;
it only fills in defaults.

6. **Create** the namespace.

The namespace is created with the appropriate labels set. Any provided **Quotas** and **Limit Range** values are applied
as a follow-up step. If those follow-up calls fail, the namespace is still created, and you can edit the namespace to
adjust values as needed. as a follow-up step. If those follow-up calls fail, the namespace is still created, and you can
edit the namespace to adjust values as needed.

> ### Adopt Existing Namespaces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adopt Existing Namespaces
```

You can adopt a namespace that already exists in the cluster so that it can be managed by VMO.

1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
2. Select **Add Existing**.
3. Select one or more unmanaged namespaces from the list and click **Adopt Namespace**.

Adopted namespaces are labeled `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=vmo-manager` but **not** marked with
`vmo-manager.spectrocloud.com/origin=created`.

### Unadopt Existing Namespaces

You can remove them from appliance management (unadopt), but you cannot delete them from the appliance UI. Delete the
underlying namespace with `kubectl` or another tool when needed.

1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
2. Right-click the namespace you want to unadopt and select **Remove from VMO**. This can only be done for namespaces
   with a **VMO STATUS** of Adopted.

> 3. Type the namespace to confirm and select **Remove from VMO**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Dupe

## Edit Namespaces

Editing an existing namespace uses a similar process as [creating a namespace](#create-namespaces). From the VMO left
main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**, and select the **Edit** icon beside the namespace. Add, remove,
and edit fields as necessary, selecting **Save changes** when finished. Editing an existing namespace uses a similar
process as [creating a namespace](#create-namespaces). From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** >
**Namespaces**, and select the **Edit** icon beside the namespace. Add, remove, and edit fields as necessary, selecting

> **Save changes** when finished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Editing an existing namespace uses a similar process as [creating a namespace](#create-namespaces).

From the VMO left
main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**, and select the **Edit** icon beside the namespace. Add, remove,
and edit fields as necessary, selecting **Save changes** when finished.
```

Reviewer: Dupes

:::info

Namespace names are immutable. Kubernetes does not allow renaming a namespace, so the name field is shown but disabled
in edit mode. To use a different name, create a new namespace, move resources over, and delete the old namespace.

:::

## Delete or Unadopt Namespaces

### Delete Namespaces

You can remove them from appliance management (unadopt), but you cannot delete them from the appliance UI. Delete the

> underlying namespace with `kubectl` or another tool when needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Delete Namespaces

Take the following steps to delete a namespace created using the VMO UI.
```

1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
2. Right-click the namespace you want to delete and select **Delete Namespace**. This can only be done for namespaces

>    with a **VMO STATUS** of Created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   with a **VMO Status** of **Created**. Alternatively, use the **Delete** icon.
```

Even if they use all caps, we don't.

> 3. Type the namespace to confirm and select **Delete**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enter the namespace you are deleting, and select **Delete**.
```

### Unadopt Existing Namespaces

You can remove them from appliance management (unadopt), but you cannot delete them from the appliance UI. Delete the

> underlying namespace with `kubectl` or another tool when needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Unadopt Namespaces

You can remove the ability to provision VMO-related resources in non-VMO managed namespaces by "unadopting" a namespace, but you cannot delete the namespace itself from the VMO UI. Unadopting a namespace does not remove any resources within the namespace.

To delete the
underlying namespace, use `kubectl` or similar tool.
```

1. From the VMO left main menu, select **Infrastructure** > **Namespaces**.
2. Right-click the namespace you want to unadopt and select **Remove from VMO**. This can only be done for namespaces

>    with a **VMO STATUS** of Adopted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   with a **VMO Status** of **Adopted**.
```

> 3. Type the namespace to confirm and select **Remove from VMO**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enter the namespace to remove from VMO, and select **Remove from VMO**. The namespace is required only if there are existing resources in the adopted namespace.
```

Discovered that little tidbit by accident 

<img width="563" height="278" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8f5f08fe-3b86-4327-914d-7e403f5718c4" />

vs 

<img width="561" height="585" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/52897e50-b306-468e-9c81-10d08f73ae71" />

:::info

Adopted namespaces show a confirmation dialog listing existing VMs, DataVolumes, snapshots, services, and PVCs in the
namespace before unadopting. The resources remain after the namespace is removed from appliance management; they are no
longer surfaced in the UI.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

No gripes with having an admonition at the end. I just think the information is better surfaced in the intro so that they know before attempting the "unadopt" process that no resources will be lost.
